Add snippet compiler docs (#2146)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/scala3-scaladoc/snippet-compiler.md

In order to turn on debug mode, add CLI argument:

`-Ysnippet-compiler-debug`

### Directly in the snippet

Arguments specified directly in the snippet override these specified using CLI. These arguments are located in snippet info part:

````
```scala <snippet-compiler-args>
// snippet
```
````

In order to configure snippet checking for specific snippet, add following argument to its snippet info part:

`sc:<flag>`

where flag is one of available flags (see above).

## Features overview

### Context

Our goal is to make snippets behave as much as possible as it is defined within a given member. For us it brings a natural feel to snippets. To achieve this, we implemented a wrapping mechanism that provides a context for each snippet.

Let’s assume that for some method `foo` inside class `Bar` in package `baz`, we’ve got a snippet:

```scala
2+2
```

Result of wrapping a snippet using our mechanism looks as follows:

```scala
package baz
trait Snippet { self: Bar =>
  2+2
}
```

Besides our main goal, it reduces the boilerplate of a snippet, because you don’t need to import members of the same package and instantiate documented class.

> As there might be a situation when your snippet doesn’t work as expected, we’ve exposed an extra flag that prints a wrapped snippet to console in order to debug it.

Reviewer: Can we mention the flag here?

### Hiding code

Sometimes it’s inevitable to import some symbols from different parts of projects or prepare enviroment for a snippets that we want to show to the reader. A big block of imports and initializations of necessary classes can result in loss of readablity. On the other hand, we’ve read a lot of opinions that people would like to be able to see the whole code. For that case we introduced special syntax for snippets that hides certain fragments of code, but you can always expand the snippet in documentation.

Example:

```scala
//{
import scala.collection.immutable.List
//}
val intList: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3)
```

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/hiding-code.gif)

### Assert compilation errors

> Scala with its rich type system allows us to ensure almost complete correctness of code in compile-time. Creators use this mechanism to detect mistakes at compile-time instead of runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scala with its rich type system allows us to ensure almost complete correctness of code in compile-time. Sometimes, documentation should mention case where code should not compile or authors wants to provide ways to recover from certain compilation errors. 
```

Example:

```scala

> val iAmWrong: Int = 2.3

Reviewer: Can we use more realistic example? I think something like
```
// compiles
List((1,2), (2,3)).toMap 
// we cannot prove that Int is a Tuple
List(1,2,3).toMap

```

for(i <- 1.to(10)) yield i * 2
```

results in:

```nohighlight

At 18:24:
  val iAmWrong: Int = 2.3
Error: Found:    (2.3d : Double)
Required: Int
```

Examples presenting code that fails at compile-time are sometimes very important. For example you can show how the library is secured against incorrect code. The other use case is to present common mistakes and how to solve them. Taking that into account, we decided to provide a functionality to check if the marked code snippets don’t compile.

For snippet that compiles without error:

```scala
val iAmGood: Int = 2
for(i ← 1.to(10)) yield i*2
```

results in:

```nohighlight

In static site (./docs/docs/index.md):
Error: Snippet should not compile but compiled succesfully
```

For snippet that fails to compile:

```scala
val iAmWrong: Int = 2.3
for(i <- 1.to(10)) yield i * 2
```

Passes the snippet validation and shows expected compilation errors in documentation.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/assert-compilation-errors.gif)

### Snippet includes

> While writing code snippets, we often need a mechanism to reuse code from one snippet in another. As an example, imagine the situation that we want to describe some operations for previously defined model. For all these operations we need to have a defined model but instead of having big, obscure code block we want to split snippet apart and describe operations one by one. On the other side, we don't want to define model in each snippet. Another instance might be a case when you want to create a bigger piece of code but you want to make it part by part so that the user follow your steps. For these scenarios and probably many more we added a new feature: *snippet includes*.

Reviewer: I think we can also start with example.

It allows you to reuse code from one snippet in another which results in less redundancy and better maintainability.

To configure it, you need to add a `sc-name` argument directly in the snippet that you want to include:

```` ```scala sc-name:<snippet-name> ````

> where `snippet-name` should be unique in file scope and shouldn't contain whitespaces and commas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `snippet-name` should be unique in file scope and cannot contain whitespaces and commas.
```

> Then, you need to add a `sc-compile-with` argument directly in the snippet that should contain include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, you can to add a `sc-compile-with` argument directly in the snippet that should contain include:
```

```` ```scala sc-compile-with:<snippet-name>(,<snippet-name>)+ ````

where `snippet-name` is the name of snippet that should be included.

Example:

````
```scala sc-name:Greeting.scala
trait Greeting(val name: String):
  def msg = s"How are you, $name"

class C extends Greeting("Bob"):
  println(msg)
```
````

````
```scala sc-compile-with:Greeting.scala
trait FormalGreeting extends Greeting:
  override def msg = s"How do you do, $name"
```
````

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/snippet-includes.gif)

> You can specify more than one include. The order in which they are specified defines the order of inclusion. There's a constraint that you can only include snippets that are defined above the target snippet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify more than one include. The order in which they are specified defines the order of inclusion. 

**Warning**: you can only include snippets that are defined above the target snippet.
```

## Getting started

By default, snippet validation is turned off for all snippets. It can be turned on by simply adding a following argument to Scaladoc:

`-snippet-compiler:compile`

For sbt, it might look like this:

```scala
Compile / doc / scalacOptions ++= Seq("-snippet-compiler:compile")
```

This option turns on snippet compiler for all `scala` snippets present in project (it recognizes them by ```scala part). Currently, snippet validation works in both docstrings written in Markdown and static sites.

If you are starting new project, this configuration should be enough for you. However, in case you migrate existing project you might want to disable compilation for some snippets that can't be currently fixed.

To do this, you can add a flag directly to the snippet:

````
```scala sc:nocompile

> // snippet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// under the hood `map` is transformed into
List(1).map( _  + 1)(<implicits>)
```

Reviewer: Or some other example that make sense not to compile

Author: changed

````
```scala sc:fail
List(1,2,3).toMap
```
````

For more thorough explanation and more sophisticated configuration e.g. path-based flag settings see [Advanced configuration](#advanced-configuration) section.

## Features overview

### Assert compilation errors

Scala with its rich type system allows us to ensure almost complete correctness of code in compile-time. Sometimes, documentation should mention case where code should not compile or authors wants to provide ways to recover from certain compilation errors.

Example:

```scala
List(1,2,3).toMap
```

results in:

```nohighlight

At 18:21:
  List(1,2,3).toMap
Error: Cannot prove that Int <:< (K, V)

where:    K is a type variable with constraint 
          V is a type variable with constraint 
.
```

Examples presenting code that fails at compile-time are sometimes very important. For example you can show how the library is secured against incorrect code. The other use case is to present common mistakes and how to solve them. Taking that into account, we decided to provide a functionality to check if the marked code snippets don’t compile.

For snippet that compiles without error:

> ```scala
> List((1,2), (2,3)).toMap
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~~~~
~~~ scala sc:fail
List((1, 2), (2, 3)).toMap
~~~
~~~~
```

results in:

```nohighlight

In static site (./docs/docs/index.md):
Error: Snippet should not compile but compiled succesfully
```

For snippet that fails to compile:

```scala
List(1,2,3).toMap

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would show that example first, and also, please show the usage of the `sc:fail` option.

Passes the snippet validation and shows expected compilation errors in documentation.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/assert-compilation-errors.gif)

### Context

> Our goal is to make snippets in docstrings behave as much as possible as it is defined within a given scope (in certain package, inside a class). For us it brings a natural feel to snippets. To achieve this, we implemented a wrapping mechanism that provides a context for each snippet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our goal is to make snippets in docstrings behave as much as possible as if they were defined within a given scope (in a certain package, inside a class). We believe it brings a natural feel to snippets. To achieve this, we implemented a wrapping mechanism that provides a context for each snippet.
```

> Let's assume that we want to document method `slice` in a `collection.List`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's assume that we want to document the method `slice` in a `collection.List`. 
```

> We want to explain how it work by comparing it to combination of `drop` and `take` method so using snippet like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to explain how it works by comparing it to a combination of `drop` and `take` methods so using snippet like:
```

```scala

> slice(2,5) == drop(2).take(3)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
slice(2, 5) == drop(2).take(3)
```

```
is one of the first thing that comes to mind. As you probably have guessed, this will not compile without a **context** feature.

Besides our main goal, it reduces the boilerplate of a snippet, because you don’t need to import members of the same package and instantiate documented class.

> For people that are curious how our context mechanism works, the snippet after preprocessing will look like this:

Reviewer 2: I feel like something is missing, how do we use the “context” feature?

Author: Added a part that explains that context feature is automatically turned on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For people that are curious on how our context mechanism works, the snippet after preprocessing looks like this:
```

```scala
package scala.collection
trait Snippet { self: List =>
  slice(2,5) == drop(2).take(3)

> }

Reviewer 2: I am confused, this is not a valid Scala snippet. Maybe consider using another example?

Author: There's a type parameter missing. Does this snippet look ok?
```
trait Snippet[A] { self: List[A] =>
  slice(2,5) == drop(2).take(3)
}
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, thanks! That's interesting, and I guess when we document a method we can access the type and value parameters as well?

Author: Yes, we can

```

### Context

Our goal is to make snippets behave as much as possible as if they were defined within a given scope (in a certain package, inside a class). We believe it brings a natural feel to snippets. To achieve this, we implemented a wrapping mechanism that provides a context for each snippet. The preprocessing is done automatically for all snippets in docstrings.

Let's assume that we want to document the method `slice` in a `collection.List`. 

We want to explain how it works by comparing it to a combination of `drop` and `take` method so using snippet like:
```scala
slice(2, 5) == drop(2).take(3)
```
is one of the first thing that comes to mind. As you probably have guessed, this will not compile without a **context** feature.

Besides our main goal, it reduces the boilerplate of a snippet, because you don’t need to import members of the same package and instantiate documented class.

For people that are curious how our context mechanism works, the snippet after preprocessing will look like this:

```scala
package scala.collection
trait Snippet[A] { self: List[A] =>
  slice(2,5) == drop(2).take(3)
}
```

### Hiding code

> Despite having the context feature described above, sometimes an author needs to provide more elements to scope. A big block of imports and initializations of necessary classes can result in loss of readablity. On the other hand, we’ve read a lot of opinions that people would like to be able to see the whole code. For that case we introduced special syntax for snippets that hides certain fragments of code, but you can always expand the snippet in documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Despite having the context feature described above, sometimes an author needs to provide more elements to a scope. However, on one hand, a big block of imports and initializations of necessary classes can result in loss of readablity. But on the other hand, we’ve read a lot of opinions that people would like to be able to see the whole code. For this second case we’ve introduced special syntax for snippets that hides certain fragments of code---`import` statements, for example---but also allows that code to be expanded in the documentation with a single click.
```

(I believe the `---` text is supposed to translate into a — (an em dash).

Example:

```scala
//{
import scala.collection.immutable.List
//}
val intList: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3)
```

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/hiding-code.gif)

### Snippet includes

While writing code snippets, we often need a mechanism to reuse code from one snippet in another.

> Take a look at the following piece of documentation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For instance, take a look at the following piece of documentation:
```

(I suggest merging this sentence with the previous paragraph.)

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/documentation-snippet.png)

> To successfully compile the last snippet, we need to have previously declared definitions in scope. For this scenario and probably many more we added a new feature: snippet includes. It allows you to reuse code from one snippet in another which results in less redundancy and better maintainability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To successfully compile the last snippet, we need to have previously declared definitions in scope. For this scenario---and probably many more---we added a new feature: snippet includes. This allows you to reuse code from one snippet in another, resulting in less redundancy and better maintainability.
```

> To configure it, you need to add a `sc-name` argument directly in the snippet that you want to include:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure this, just add a `sc-name` argument to the snippet that you want to include in a later code block:
```

```` ```scala sc-name:<snippet-name> ````

> where `snippet-name` should be unique in file scope and cannot contain whitespaces and commas.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
where `snippet-name` should be unique in file scope, and cannot contain whitespaces and commas.
```

> Then, you can add a `sc-compile-with` argument directly in the snippet that should contain include:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, in a later code block in your documentation, use a `sc-compile-with` argument in the `scala` snippet that should “include” the previous code block:
```

```` ```scala sc-compile-with:<snippet-name>(,<snippet-name>)+ ````

where `snippet-name` is the name of snippet that should be included.

After configuring this feature in our example, the code looks like this:

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/documentation-snippet2.png)

> And the output looks like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and the output looks like this:
```

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/images/scala3/scaladoc/snippet-includes.png)

> You can specify more than one include. The order in which they are specified defines the order of inclusion. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can specify more than one include. Note that the order in which they are specified defines the order of inclusion. 
```

**Warning**: you can only include snippets that are defined above the target snippet.

## Advanced configuration

> Often turning on snippet valiation for all snippets is not enough as the usecases can be more sophisticated. We prepared our tool for such situations to allow user adjust it to his needs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Often turning on snippet validation for _all_ snippets is not the proper level of control, as the use cases can be more sophisticated. We prepared our tool for such situations, i.e., to allow users to adjust it to their needs.
```

### Available flags

> Snippet compiler exposes three flags that change its behavior:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To provide more control, the snippet compiler exposes three flags that let you change its behavior:
```

- `compile` - turns on snippet checking
- `nocompile` - turns off snippet checking

> - `fail` - turns on snippet checking with assertion that snippets don't compile

Reviewer 3: I’m not 100% sure what the 'fail' sentence means. Does this refer to the `fail` flag previously introduced?

### Path-based settings

> Instead of setting one flag to all snippets in project, it can be set for certain path only. It can be done by adding `<path>=` prefix before flag.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more flexibility, instead of setting one flag to control all snippets in a project, it can be set for a certain path only, by adding `<path>=` prefix before flag. For example:
```

> Example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> `-snippet-compiler:docs=compile` - sets `compile` flag for snippets in `docs` file. If `docs` is a directory, the flag is set for all files inside `docs`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`-snippet-compiler:docs=compile` - sets the `compile` flag for snippets in the `docs` file. If `docs` is a directory, the flag is set for all files inside `docs`.
```

> Additionally, `-snippet-compiler` option can be supplied by more than one setting. Settings are delimited by commas.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `-snippet-compiler` option can be controlled by more than one setting, with settings delimited by commas. For example:
```

> Example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

```
-snippet-compiler:docs=compile,library/src=compile,library/src/scala/quoted=nocompile,library/src/scala/compiletime=fail
```

> Flags are chosen by longest prefix match so we can define a general setting and then change behavior for more specific paths.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Flags are chosen by the longest prefix match, so we can define a general setting and then change that default behavior for more specific paths.
```

```
-snippet-compiler:compile,library/src/scala/quoted=nocompile,library/src/scala/compiletime=fail 
```

> Flag without path prefix is treated as default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A flag without a path prefix---such as the `compile` flag in this example---is treated as the default.
```

### Override directly in the snippet

> CLI arguments are a good mechanism for setting flags for certain files. However, it cannot be used to configure snippet compiler for certain snippet. For example an author wants to write one snippet that should fail and few snippets that compile. We took that under consideration and added a feature to override settings directly in the snippet. These arguments are located in snippet info part:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CLI arguments are a good mechanism for setting flags for certain files. However, this approach can’t be used to configure the snippet compiler for specific snippets. For example, an author wants to write one snippet that should fail, and other snippets that should compile. Again we took this under consideration, and added a feature to override settings directly inside snippets. These arguments are located in the snippet info part:
```

Is there a more proper name for the “snippet info part”? Earlier we refer to this area as a flag, but I’m not sure if that’s correct here.

````
```scala <snippet-compiler-args>
// snippet
```
````

> In order to configure snippet checking for specific snippet, add following argument to its snippet info part:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For instance, to configure snippet checking for a specific snippet, add the following argument to its snippet info part, where `flag` is one of the available flags listed above (e.g., `compile`, `nocompile`, or `fail`):
```

`sc:<flag>`

> where flag is one of available flags (see above).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a specific example, this code shows how to use the `fail` flag in an individual snippet:
```
